Bulletin of Mothemnticnl Biology Vol. 52, No. l/2. pp. 99-115. 1990. 
Printed in Great Britain. oo92-824OjW$3.OO+O.MI 
Pergamon Press plc 
Society for Mathematical Biology 
A LOGICAL CALCULUS OF THE IDEAS IMMANENT IN 
NERVOUS ACTIVITY* 
n WARREN S. MCCULLOCH AND WALTER PITTS 
University of Illinois, College of Medicine, 
Department of Psychiatry at the Illinois Neuropsychiatric Institute, 
University of Chicago, Chicago, U.S.A. 
Because of the “all-or-none” character of nervous activity, neural events and the relations among 
them can be treated by means of propositional logic. It is found that the behavior of every net can 
be described in these terms, with the addition of more complicated logical means for nets 
containing circles; and that for any logical expression satisfying certain conditions, one can find a 
net behaving in the fashion it describes. It is shown that many particular choices among possible 
neurophysiological assumptions are equivalent, in the sense that for every net behaving under 
one assumption, there exists another net which behaves under the other and gives the same 
results, although perhaps not in the same time. Various applications of the calculus are 
discussed. 
1. Introduction. Theoretical neurophysiology rests on certain cardinal 
assumptions. The nervous system is a net of neurons, each having a soma and 
an axon. Their adjunctions, or synapses, are always between the axon of one 
neuron and the soma of another. At any instant a neuron has some threshold, 
which excitation must exceed to initiate an impulse. This, except for the fact 
and the time of its occurence, is determined by the neuron, not by the 
excitation. From the point of excitation the impulse is propagated to all parts of 
the neuron. The velocity along the axon varies directly with its diameter, from 
< 1 ms-’ in thin axons, which are usually short, to > 150 ms- ’ in thick axons, 
which are usually long. The time for axonal conduction is consequently of little 
importance in determining the time of arrival of impulses at points unequally 
remote from the same source. Excitation across synapses occurs predominant- 
ly from axonal terminations to somata. It is still a moot point whether this 
depends upon irreciprocity of individual synapses or merely upon prevalent 
anatomical configurations. To suppose the latter requires no hypothesis ad hoc 
and explains known exceptions, but any assumption as to cause is compatible 
with the calculus to come. No case is known in which excitation through a 
single synapse has elicited a nervous impulse in any neuron, whereas any 
neuron may be excited by impulses arriving at a sufficient number of 
neighboring synapses within the period of latent addition, which lasts 
~0.25 ms. Observed temporal summation of impulses at greater intervals 
* Reprinted from the Bulletin of Mathematical Biophysics, Vol. 5, pp. 115-133 (1943). 
99 